>> Richard Feldman: So
now let's talk about hoisting.
So again, we're gonna start with
this x = 5, y = increment 3 example.
But this time I'm going to do something
that our language does not support,
but we're just gonna roll with it for
the purpose of the example,
where I wrote the function
keyword down below it.
So in JavaScript, this is a thing you
can do, not in our subset of JavaScript,
but in JavaScript in general you're
allowed to call a function before
it has actually been declared.
Now, if we do our same kinda scoping
algorithm that we've been doing here,
okay, we got a new scope, we push
the scope onto it, we add x to that scope,
we add y to that scope.
And then later on, we say, if scope
has increment, we have a naming error.
Well, right here,
we have not added increment to scope.
So as soon as we hit this thing and
we run this code, saying,
let's see if we've got increment
in our scope, it's gonna say,
well, no, you don't have it in scope,
so that's gonna be a naming error.
But of course, those are not the semantics
we want for this increment, so
how do we deal with that?
How do we make it so
that if we wanted to support this feature,
which we don't precisely, because it's
not only so complicated here, but it's
even more complicated in type checking,
so we're definitely not supporting it.
But if we did want to,
how would we actually implement this?
Well, there's a very straightforward
way you can do that,
which is just do a second pass.
So basically, what we can do is have a
separate hoisting pass, where at first we
just pretend everybody who's not
a function keyword doesn't exist.
[LAUGH] We're gonna scan through all
the parse tree nodes and just say,
if you are not a function,
you stand off in a corner right now,
because I am only considering
the functions right now.
And then I just go through and
just add all of them to
scope right away at the top.
And so, it's as if, that's why it's
called hoisting, you picked them up and
hoisted them up to the top.
You're basically saying, okay,
I'm going to add you to the scope,
at the top of the scope, as if you had
been defined above everything else.
But we're not actually hoisting it, we're
not really rearranging the nodes at all.
All we're doing is we're just doing a
separate pass where all these other things
are sort of ignored for the moment.
And then adding it to scope first,
such that by the time we come back and
do the non-hoisting pass, the regular
naming resolution that we've been doing
previously, now x and
y have been added here.
And it's no problem because they've
already been added to scope before.
Well, so the actual sequence here
would be increments added to scope
in the hoisting pass.
Then we come along, we add x.
Then, before we can add y, we need to
process what y is being set to, and
that's where we would actually check for
the increment.
Yep, it's in scope, it's great,
because of the hoisting pass, and
then we finally add y scope.
So, we're not doing that in this compiler,
but this is a common thing that a lot of
languages support, is calling
functions after they're defined.
And this is a very straightforward
way to support that,
is just being able to do a separate
pass over the same exact data structure.
But now we're not mutating
the data structure,
we're not changing the parse tree nodes.
Despite the name hoisting,
we're not actually moving the nodes,
we're not moving them up.
We're just sort of having the effect of
hoisting it up the scope conceptually.
Any questions about hoisting?
Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: I'm curious,
is it common to do a two-pass approach for
handling hoisting?
I was also thinking too, would it make
sense to just kind of keep track of,
cuz is hoisting this function
specific thing typically, right?
>> Richard Feldman: Right.
>> Speaker 2: This track, okay,
whenever we call this function
at the end of this first pass.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
it's a great question.
So there are definitely a lot
of different ways you can do it.
So, if you don't care about
modifying the node structure,
a way that you can do it is you can
basically have, as you're going along,
going from tokens to parse tree nodes.
You can say, okay,
I'm just gonna have a separate list of all
the functions that are defined in here.
And then whenever I encounter one,
I'm gonna put it in that list.
And then that way, when you come through
and do your naming pass, you can just look
at that list first before looking
at the everything else list.
So that would avoid the second pass,
you're still only doing one
pass from tokens to parsing.
And honestly, I'm not aware of exactly
how common any given approach is.
I think a lot of it just depends on
tradeoffs of how much does the compiler
care about performance versus
how much performance difference
they observe if they benchmark it and
try multiple ways.
But in a lot of cases, these types of
things are things where I think people
just kind of implemented however they
decide to implement it the first time and
probably never benchmark it another way.
But yeah, I mean, there's definitely lots
of different ways you could do this,
this is the most
straightforward one I would say.
But there are fancier ones that could
avoid the second pass if you wanted
to, for sure.
All right, yeah,
then we do the constant equals new set and
all that other fun stuff
inside the increment function.
Okay, so again, coming back to this theme,
traverse input, generate output.
So this was the naming resolution step
that we added in between parsing and
code gen.
There is an optional additional
thing that we can do here,
which is, we can actually change
the intermediate representation.
So this is what's known
as canonicalization.
And you basically, instead of just
printing out the same parse tree and
just being, yeah, we're gonna keep
essentially the same input as before,
except now we've got this new scope thing
which may or may not be useful later on.
Now we have a new thing
called a canonical IR.
And basically,
the canonical IR is essentially
the same kinda thing as a parse tree.
But it's been transformed in various ways
that are gonna be useful to later stages
of the compiler.
So some examples of things we might
do there is sometimes you do what's
called string interning.
We saw there's a lot of identifiers
that are coming up, a lot of strings.
Doing lots of string comparisons can be
way more expensive computationally than
doing lots of integer comparisons.
So string interning is a thing where,
as you're going through the parse tree,
every time you see an identifier,
you basically put it in a hash map.
It's not really a hash map, but
close enough, where you say, okay,
I'm gonna go put this
thing in the hash map and
then get back a unique identifier
that's an integer that represents that.
And then now in my canonical IR, every
time we would have had an identifier in
the parse tree,
now we just have an integer.
So that means that later on, in future
stages of the compiler, when they're
traversing that and doing all sorts of,
did you have the same identifier here?
We're doing those scope lookups,
those can be integer lookups,
rather than having to be
entire string lookups.
Obviously, there's a cost of doing the
interning in the first place, but again,
this is a trade off that
some compilers will make.
So there's a bunch of stuff like that,
another thing that will
commonly happen is de-sugaring.
So you'll have multiple different ways to
represent something in the parse tree.
And then you'll kind of condense that down
and just eliminate some of those cases and
be, okay, this one's just
syntax trigger for that one.
So we're not gonna have two
different canonical IR nodes for
that, we're just gonna turn the one
into the other and then that's it.
And then we just have fewer cases in
our switch statement in later stages
of the IR.
So again, not something we're
gonna do in this workshop, but
a good thing to be aware of.
Okay, so a summary of part 2,
things we talked about.
So first,
we talked about declarations and lookups.
So this is basically, you declare
something that adds it to the scope set.
And then lookups, later on,
is when you are actually
trying to answer the question,
was it in the scope set at the top
the time I was trying to do the lookup?
If not, it's naming,
otherwise, you're all set.
We talked about hoisting,
which is where you want to do a lookup,
essentially before the declaration.
Yeah, like we said,
typically for functions.
And a way you can do this is just have
an extra pass, just for functions.
We're not gonna do that in this compiler,
but is an important thing to know about,
and there are other
strategies you can do too.
And then finally, nested scopes, which is
definitely something that basically every
programming language needs to deal with.
And this is where you are not just
having a single scope set, but
rather an entire array of them.
And you're pushing new scopes, new sets
onto that array, as we descend into more
and more nested sets, and then popping
them off as we exit those nested scopes.
And then every time we look through this,
we have to go through every
single one in the array to see,
did anybody in our current scope
actually have this thing declared?
Because if so, then great, we will allow
it, and if nobody had it declared,
then that's the point at
which we say naming error.
>> Speaker 3: How do we keep track
of which scope was where between
the two stages and two pass?
Would we attach scoped tokens?
>> Richard Feldman: How do we keep
track of which scope is where?
So in general, I would say that it's
pretty uncommon to need to keep track of
scope in subsequent phases.
The reason we're okay with doing a push
here and a pop here, which is destructive
and we're not really writing down
which scope was which along the way,
is that if you do wanna
track that sort of thing,
there are other arguably
better ways to do it.
So I mentioned canonicalization earlier,
that's a way that if you want to keep
track of things uniquely, and not
necessarily which scope they went with,
specifically, but rather which
ones are semantically different.
A thing you can do in canonicalization,
you can say, okay,
not only am I going to store what was the
integer that corresponds to the string for
the identifier, but I can actually
make that unique within a scope.
So in other words, in four different
scopes I have something called n,
cuz I really like that variable name.
You could choose to have your canonical
IR represent those as four different
integers, even though they
all map to the same name n.
So if you wanted to track that and
keep it along, that would be, I think,
a more common way of doing that than
actually trying to keep the scopes.
Largely because the information you
would wanna get out of them is,
these scopes can get big to be storing
all that from one phase to the next
if you really just need it for
something straightforward like that.